# spell-corrector

This single-word spell corrector is built in Java, and takes in as input both a dictionary file and the word to spell check. The dicitonary is implemented using a Trie data structure to make searching for words as efficient as possible. 

Trie (Data Structure)
- A Trie is a tree-based data structure designed to store items that are sequences of characters from an alphabet. Each Trie-Node stores a count and a sequence of Nodes, one for each element in the alphabet. Each Trie-Node has a single parent except for the root of the Trie which does not have a parent. A sequence of characters from the alphabet is stored in the Trie as a path in the Trie from the root to the last character of the sequence.
- For my Trie, words are stored (a word is a sequence of alphabetic characters) so the length of the sequence of Nodes in every Node will be 26, one for each letter of the alphabet. For any node a we will represent the count in a as a.count. For the array of Nodes in a we will use a.nodes. For the node in a’s sequence of Nodes associated with the character c we will use a.nodes[c]. For instance, a.nodes[‘b’] represents the node in a’s array of Nodes corresponding to the character ‘b’.
- Each node in the root’s array of Nodes represents the first letter of a word stored in the Trie. Each of those Nodes has an array of Nodes for the second letter of the word, and so on. For example, the word “kick” would be stored as follows: root.nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘i’].nodes[‘c’].nodes[‘k’]
- The count in a node represents the number of times a word represented by the path from the root to that node appeared in the text file from which the dictionary was created. Thus, if the word “kick” appeared twice, root.nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘i’].nodes[‘c’].nodes[‘k’].count = 2.
- If the word “kicks” appears at least once in the text file then it would be stored as root.nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘i’].nodes[‘c’].nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘s’] and root.nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘i’].nodes[‘c’].nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘s’].count would be greater than or equal to one.
- If the count value of any node, n, is zero then the word represented by the path from the root to n did not appear in the original text file. For example, if root.nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘i’].count = 0 then the word “ki” does not appear in the original text file. A node may have descendant nodes even if its count is zero. Using the example above, some of the nodes representing “kick” and “kicks” would have counts of 0 (e.g root.nodes[‘k’], root.nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘i’], and root.nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘i’].nodes[‘c’]) but root.nodes[‘k’].node[‘i’].nodes[‘c’].nodes[‘k’] and root.nodes[‘k’].node[‘i’].nodes[‘c’].nodes[‘k’].nodes[‘s’] would have counts greater than 0.

Word/Node Count Example
- Using the example above, with only “kick” and “kicks” in the Trie it would have 2 words and 6 nodes (root, k, i, c, k, s). If we were to add “kicker” the Trie would have 3 words and 8 nodes. If we were to add the word “apple” to the same Trie, it would have 4 words and 13 nodes. Adding the word “ape” would result in 5 words and 14 nodes. Adding “brick” would result in 6 words and 19 nodes. Additionally, because we only want to keep track of new nodes and words, adding the word “brick” again would result in the same node count and word count.

Spell Corrector Functionality
- All the words of the dictionary file are loaded into the Trie using Trie.add(String). The user’s input string is compared against the Trie using the Trie.find(String). If the input string (independent of case) is found in the Trie, the program will indicate that it is spelled correctly by returning the final INode of the word. If the case independent version of the input string is not found, the program will return the final INode of the most “similar” word as defined below. If the input string is not found and there is no word “similar” to it, the program will return null.


- The following rules define how a word is determined to be most similar:
  1. It has the “closest” edit distance from the input string
  2. If multiple words have the same edit distance, the most similar word is the one with the closest edit distance that is found the most times in the dictionary
  3. If multiple words are the same edit distance and have the same count/frequency, the most similar word is the one that is first alphabetically

- An edit distance of 1 will be defined below. If there is more than one word in the dictionary that is an edit distance of 1 from the input string then return the one that appears the greatest number of times in the original text file. If two or more words are an edit distance of 1 from the input string and they both appear the same number of times in the input file, return the word that is alphabetically first. If there is no word at an edit distance of 1 from the input string then the most “similar” word in the dictionary (if it exists) will have an edit distance of 2. A word w in the dictionary has an edit distance of 2 from the input string if there exists a string s (s need not be in the dictionary) such that s has an edit distance of 1 from the input string and w has an edit distance of 1 from s. As with an edit distance of 1, if more than one word has an edit distance of 2 from the input string choose the one that appears most often in the input file. If more than two appear equally often choose the one that is alphabetically first. If there is no word in the dictionary that has an edit distance of 1 or 2 then there is no word in the dictionary “similar” to the input string. In that case return null.


- There are 4 measures of edit distance that this program uses: deletion distance, transposition distance, alteration distance, and insertion distance. A word in the dictionary has an edit distance of 1 from the input string if it has a deletion distance of 1, or a transposition distance of 1, or an alteration distance of one, or an insertion distance or 1.


The Four Edit Distances:
1. Deletion Distance: A string s has a deletion distance 1 from another string t if and only if t is equal to s with one character removed. The only strings that are a deletion distance of 1 from “bird” are “ird”, “brd”, “bid”, and “bir”.
2. Transposition Distance: A string s has a transposition distance 1 from another string t if and only if t is equal to s with two adjacent characters transposed. The only strings that are a transposition Distance of 1 from “house” are “ohuse”, “huose”, “hosue” and “houes”.
3. Alteration Distance: A string s has an alteration distance 1 from another string t if and only if t is equal to s with exactly one character in s replaced by a lowercase letter that is not equal to the original letter. The only strings that are an alternation distance of 1 from “top” are “aop”, “bop”, …, “zop”, “tap”, “tbp”, …, “tzp”, “toa”, “tob”, …, and “toz”.
4. Insertion Distance: A string s has an insertion distance 1 from another string t if and only if t has a deletion distance of 1 from s. The only strings that are an insertion distance of 1 from “ask” are “aask”, “bask”, “cask”, … “zask”, “aask”, “absk”, “acsk”, … “azsk”, “asak”, “asbk”, “asck”, … “aszk”, “aska”, “askb”, “askc”, … “askz”.
